>> I am Ervin Laszlo.
And you asked me what I
have studied all my life.
I can say I've studied life.
I have not done any
formal studies at all,
not since I was in the
fifth grade, I think.
That was the last time
when the war intervened,
the Second World War.
And I launched a
career in music.
And sure, I studied it because
I was interested in everything
around me, interested in
finding out more things.
This is my chance.
And I had time and inclination.
So I have inquired.
I wouldn't say
that I've studied.
I've not studied
anything for the sake
of studying for getting
a degree or getting
a diploma of some kind.
I did what I was interested in.
I was fortunate in my
life that I could live
like that as a concert pianist.
And later on when I started
writing and my books
got published, I was invited to
a university, Yale University
first, and then to New York
State University and others
without having actually
passed any degree, attended
a university.
I started teaching
on universities
without having attended
any university course.
So I could say yes.
I have studied who I am.
I've studied what the
world around me is.
But I have not studied a subject
for the sake of that subject.
>> You are known
for many things.
One is about the Akashic
records, the Akashic field.
And I would love for us to
be able to focus on that.
>> The Akashic field
is the universe.
It's how the universe
appears to us.
When we inquire how
things are connected,
how things are conserved,
we find the answer today
through the quantum sciences.
All things are connected
to all other things.
And nothing disappears
completely without a trace.
So the universe is
an Akashic field.
The ancients called
it an Akashic field.
Today, we can call it the
universe as it appears
in the quantum sciences.
It's an Akashic
universe, you might say.
And therefore, I have felt that
what I've been considering,
what I've been discussing so
many times, so many years is
actually-- is being
carried out, borne out
more and more in
the new sciences,
especially in quantum cosmology,
in quantum consciousness
research.
This is a remarkable
Akashic kind of a universe.
4,000, 5,000 years ago,
we would have called
it the Akashic dimension.
Today we call it reality.
But this is what it is.
>> Where did the word
Akashic come from?
>> The Akasha was the dimension.
The Hindu seers about 4
and 1/2, 5,000 years ago
talked about-- they said there
are four regular dimensions--
air, water, fire, and Earth.
And they called this
the standard dimension.
But they said there is a
higher or deeper dimension,
if you like, which
includes all the others.
This is beyond all the others.
It includes all the others.
It's the deep dimension.
Later on, Plato himself
talked about this
as a platonic
dimension of the soul,
of our consciousness, our mind.
But the Akashic dimension
or Akasha dimension
dates back probably
nearly 5,000 years.
>> Ervin, you were nominated for
a Nobel Prize at least twice.
Is that correct?
>> That is correct, yes.
>> OK.
What were you nominated for?
>> Well, my work in trying to
understand the relationships
that make our world what it is,
the systems, a world system,
a world system where all things
are interacting and dependent
on all other things, not
just the economy but also
the ecology, the culture,
as well as the finance.
And this is a systemic universe.
I developed the idea of a
universe, which is based
on the strong interconnections.
This is an Akashic
universe in a way.
Out of this modeling, if
you like, of the world
that we have created
on Earth came
a series of forecasts
and expectations,
provisions as to how
we could be evolving,
how we could be developing.
My main focus always
has been on development,
on evolution, not
just economic material
development but the development
of culture, of thought,
of spirit as well.
And so because I'm trying to
pull all these things together,
it doesn't fit into
any one discipline.
The Nobel Prizes are
set up by disciplines,
to the physics and biology
and other special disciplines.
At the time of Nobel,
there was no idea
that we could have a super
discipline, a kind of which
encompasses the others,
brings it together.
So this one then, I
was nominated then
for the Peace Prize because
this idea of an interconnected
universe of which we are a
part where we evolve together
with other things is a
universe of understanding,
coherence, and ultimately,
therefore, peace.
So indirectly without
addressing my work to peace
so specifically, I
created a foundation
for understanding the world
as a domain of coherence
where we can live
and evolve in peace.
>> That is your goal, is for
our world to live in peace.
I'm wondering, when it
comes to the Akashic field,
to the universe,
that somebody might
feel as though it's so huge.
It's so gargantuan.
Why would it be
important for them
to understand the
interconnectedness
of the universe?
>> Because we are
interconnected.
The universe is a hologram.
And in a hologram,
all the information
that generates the picture
is present in every part.
The universe may be
gargantuan, but it's in us.
Not only are we in the
universe, the universe
is in us because everything that
makes the universe what it is--
today we would call it
all the information,
all the energy flows--
is actually reflected in
every cell of our body,
in every atom in every cell.
So this is not a materialistic,
cold, independent universe
where all parts are separate.
Nothing is separate.
We are part of that
whole universe.
If you want to
understand ourselves,
we have to understand
the universe.
And we can't
understand the universe
until we have a better
understanding of ourselves.
>> Sounds like a catch-22.
What information, how do we know
that we are all interconnected?
>> Now, we have also experiments
on the levels of physics about
instant interconnection
beyond space and time.
It's called nonlocality.
And then we have obviously
the effects of what we do.
The great ecologist
Garrett Hardin
says you can't do just one thing
because you do any one thing,
it has a dozen or a million
consequences and side effects.
We are connected
because everything we do
is linked to everything else.
It's like being in a network.
When you're in a network, all
the participants in a network
hear, know, perceive
what you're doing.
And they respond.
And that is the nature
of the universe.
It's a coherent-- it's
a single universe.
It's a one universe.
The great physicist
Erwin Schrödinger
said there is no such thing as
consciousness in the plural.
Now, what did he mean by that?
He said there is no such
thing as my consciousness
and your consciousness.
It's only our consciousness,
the one consciousness
which pervades the universe
because the universe has
an aspect, which is mind-like,
not just physical-like, not
just matter-like.
There is no longer a separation
between mind and matter.
Nothing is beyond
any other thing.
So it's an entirely
new way of thinking.
It's also a very old way because
the great thinkers of antiquity,
the Buddhists, for example,
the Taoists knew this.
And they considered the universe
as an interconnected whole,
which is suffused
by a higher spirit.
In modern science, in
contemporary science,
we talk about an interconnected
dynamic attractors
are dynamic impulses which are
present in the universe, which
is present in us,
in each one of us.
We reflect the universe
because we are connected to it,
we are part of it.
These concepts are so basic,
so large that you can't simply
deduct them, reduce them, or
derive them from something else.
They are fundamental.
This is how we start.
It's not how we come
to this conclusion
from looking at something else.
This something
else is also this.
Schrodinger says, you can't
go beyond consciousness.
And consciousness is one.
So what we start
with and what we have
is the sense that
we are a being who
is emerged in space and time,
who is evolving in space
and time, and who
is interconnecting
with all other things that
evolve in space and time.
>> Ervin, is it true that
humans create a past, a present,
and a future and that really
time is just there is no time
that we know.
So to that end, does that
mean that the information
for our future or
definitely our past
is somewhere as if it's
a big gigantic library?
>> It is.
It's the Akashic
records, if you like.
Information cannot be
created and cannot be deleted
because this is a world which
is an interconnected field.
That's why I call
it the Akashic field
because the Akashic records
are maintained in this field.
This field is an energy
and information field.
It's a quantum field and
strongly interconnected.
Reflecting one thing
reflects another.
Things don't just push
and pull each other.
They resonate with each other.
They show up again.
There is such a thing as
information created here
having an effect over there.
And over there could be another
planet, could be another galaxy.
As far as we know, this universe
is a single resonated field
in which all things are
connected with all other things.
This is a basic concept.
It's a basic concept that
has been known, as I said,
to the ancient thinkers.
It's re-emerging today.
And it gives us an
entirely different view
from the standard classical view
of a material universe where
bits and pieces
of matter are just
moving about in passive
space and in different time.
That's the Newtonian paradigm.
And that has led to this
machine concept of the universe
where everything is
separate, everything
can be treated individually,
where things can be broken apart
and perhaps can
be rebuilt again.
But everything is
basically separate.
Einstein said that this
separation is an illusion.
And I think all the
great physicists,
the great scientists
today concur
there is no absolute separation.
I am not here and
you over there.
We share the same space
and the same time.
And our destiny is
also interlinked.
I believe that everything
that ever happened
is here to influence
what is happening now.
I don't believe that
it determines what is
going to happen in the future.
I think this universe
has a degree of freedom.
Things can be created.
Things can evolve.
Things can be decided yet.
In fact, we're living through
an epoch now after the--
we're still in the pandemic but
certainly after a big crisis
in which many things
become possible.
But these many things are
not prescribed in the past.
We can create the future, not
without limits, of course.
It has to be built on what
has already been there.
But the past does not
determine the future.
The future is determined by
how we interact in the present.
Together, all of us--
that means all beings
in space and time--
through their interaction create
the world that is coming to be.
>> Ervin, how do you think it
came to be that we decided we
were separate from one another?
>> It's convenient.
It's very convenient
to take things apart,
and then you can manipulate it.
You build a bicycle.
And if the pedal doesn't
work, you change the pedal.
You see?
Or the spokes on the wheel.
It's very convenient.
You can take things
apart, fix it,
and put it back together again.
That's the ideal.
In nature also, we can take
what we want from nature,
then we can manipulate things
and replace it somehow.
But it's all separate.
It all can be
independently handled.
Technology is based on
that, materials technology,
not the new technology, not
the electronic technology.
The way we are registered
in this conversation
that we have across
the continents
is not a material phenomenon.
It's not a little bits of matter
being moved here and there.
It's information being
cycled simultaneously.
And in reality, it's
even cycled even more
because we in our deeper
sense with our consciousness,
we can perceive others
in a deeper sense.
And the great yogis
have known this.
The great spiritual
masters have known this.
And now this experiment for the
nonlocality of consciousness,
for distance remote
perceptions, remote healing,
there is new evidence
for all of this.
This is very, very
different from
the separate
materialistic world which
our fathers and forefathers
thought they had.
And because they
created technologies,
they created a world based on
that materialist, separatist
idea, they could
destroy the harmony.
They could destroy the oneness,
which otherwise would be there
in nature.
So that was a dangerous
way to proceed.
We are learning it.
And we are also paying
the cost of what
it is when you break apart
the resonance, the wholeness
of the world in which we live.
And we just look at
one thing at a time,
us seeing our nation,
our country first,
never mind the rest.
That kind of
thinking takes apart
the coherence of the whole.
And it breaks apart
the very basis of life.
Let me just add.
Life is only possible if
every quantum, every particle
in every cell of
our body cooperates
with every other cell.
If there is a break in
cooperation anywhere,
it's a disease.
If there is a break
in cooperation
and their subsidiary elements
of cooperation come together,
that's a disease.
That's a serious disease.
That's cancer.
And eventually, that separate
development of growth
is killing the host, as we know.
So just in this whole body
is a cooperative system,
so is the whole human world, the
whole world in the biosphere,
a cooperative system.
We have neglected it.
We have forgotten it.
We have ignored it.
And we are paying the price.
We are now coming back to it.
It takes sometimes a crisis
to make us see the light,
to make us see which way to go.
Now we are learning.
I think we have learned
just now that we
are all in the same boat.
What happens any one part has an
influence on every other part,
and that together,
we have the option,
option not only to
mechanically go on
and doing the same thing as
we have always been doing
but to do something,
what we really want
because this is a
permissible universe.
A permissive universe
in that sense,
it allows many things to happen.
We are not forced
into a cage, not
forced into a big wheel where
we can only do one thing.
That's a lesson we
are now learning.
And we have to make use of it
because we cannot just keep
going doing what
we have been doing.
That's what leads to
more and more breakdowns.
We have to go forward
and create a world
where all people interact,
where all people can live,
all people can flourish.
We can do it.
The information is there.
Our technologies properly
used, properly developed
can serve this.
It's up to us.
So I think it's a
tremendous opportunity.
It's an exciting time to live.
I wouldn't exchange it for
any other time in history.
>> Well, that's
saying a lot, Ervin.
There is things that seem to get
in the way of being able to have
the kind of peace
that you talk about,
egos and all of the things
that come with that.
Do you think it's even
possible for humans
to have this kind of peace?
>> Nature has that
kind of a peace.
I live here in a
hilltop in Tuscany.
And I see nature around me.
Nature is whole.
Nature is harmonious.
It's we who created
this harmony,
so it's not something
we have to create.
It's something we
have to eliminate,
eliminate the disturbance.
We have become a
noise in the system.
We have got to get rid of this,
go back to what we truly are.
We are part of a whole system.
We are a whole
harmonious resonant part.
We have got to learn to act
like we are what we truly are.
We are healthy
when we are whole.
And very interestingly
enough, in several languages
that I know, even the
very concept of health
means wholeness.
And this is true.
And the ancients knew it.
I've been looking at some
ancient scriptures, for example,
about health.
And they all say, the
person who is well adjusted,
the person who has moral
virtues, the person who
can live together in
peace with others, that's
the person who is healthy.
And they've told this to
us thousands of years ago.
We just thought we
can make ourselves
healthy by mechanical,
biochemical, biophysical means.
That can help, of
course, sometimes
if there is a disease at hand.
But the way to be
healthy is to be one,
to respect your oneness within
your body and your oneness
with the world around you.
That's healthy.
That's flourishing.
That's peace.
Peace, health, oneness
are all the same concept.
>> Back up a little bit, Ervin,
you mentioned very quickly that
you had a second chance studying
the way that you did, reading,
and learning.
And I'm wondering what you
meant by, I had a second chance.
>> Well, I shifted from being
a professional concert pianist
to being an academic, and then
later on, I shifted from being
an academic into being
a public servant,
a civil servant at
the United Nations,
and then finally becoming a
freelance thinker and consultant
and writer.
So I had many second
chances in a way.
I have been always
impatient in the sense
of not wanting to put up with
the same thing year after year.
I was inquiring,
looking forward,
trying to find out who I am,
what the world is around me.
And I managed to get it as
a basis actually for living.
I never lived, I never worked
simply just to get a paycheck.
Maybe this sounds selfish.
But it has been my ambition,
my aspiration in life
to follow what I want to do.
I was fortunate in having a
wonderful wife and family, two
boys and several grandchildren,
two great-grandchildren
at the present time, and
understanding colleagues
around me with whom I
could create the Laszlo
Institute of New
Paradigm Research
and carry forward this
work in such a way
that it would benefit not
only us to live from one day
to the next but
benefit by bringing
in information, knowledge,
ultimately wisdom
into the world.
>> Other people call you a
child prodigy with piano.
Would you agree with that?
>> That's what it's called.
>> Do you think that you
tapped into the Akashic field,
or do you think that ability
came from somewhere else.
>> It's an experience that
one has when one plays music.
Great music played perfectly,
the way that it should be played
is you're no longer
in this world.
You are in another dimension.
It's a dynamic dimension of
wholeness, peace, of resonance.
And that experience
I've had since a child.
My mother was a piano teacher.
My uncle was a philosopher.
I had a heavily
charged childhood
as it were because I
had my piano practice
sessions in the
morning with my mother,
walks with my uncle in
the park in the afternoon,
talking about things
like understanding
in the world, things
like living with nature
and this kind of thing, which is
very unusual for a small child.
I thought I forgot
all these things
until I was in my
late teens when
I was having quite a successful
concert career in New York
City with Life
articles appearing
on me in "Life Magazine,"
in "Time," and in "Newsweek"
and so on.
And then all of a sudden,
this idea cropped up,
but why am I doing this?
What am I doing?
And then these are
the questions that you
ask when you turn to
science and to philosophy.
So I turned that way.
I started attending courses.
I started cultivating friends
who had similar questions,
asking these questions, trying
to set out answers of my own.
And then by a fortunate
coincidence or perhaps not
a coincidence, but
it seems like that,
these notes got
published as a book,
even though I didn't have
any background in philosophy
and science.
My degree came as a child
prodigy when I was 15 years old.
I got an artist degree in
music at the Franz Liszt
Academy in Budapest.
But I had no academic
qualifications.
And yet when I wrote this
book and was published,
I got an invitation from
the Philosophy Department
in Yale University to come and
give seminars on this thinking
on my ideas.
So I went over there.
And I was launched then on a
career in the academic world,
going from there to
various other universities.
And so it's something
that I just followed.
And it's not because
it was prescribed.
It was something
that is happening
to me, coming to me from the
experience of music as a child.
From the age of nine, I was
playing concerts solo and also
with orchestra.
And performing to a public
with a group of musicians
who follow you, who
become one with you
is such an incredible
experience.
It's a feeling sense of being
fulfilled or being one or being
carried forward.
It's difficult to describe.
But that's what motivated me.
That's what I've been
searching for in science also.
Wherever I see, I
search for that oneness,
for that interaction for
this collaboration, which
makes the body, a living
body, makes it whole.
A society becomes healthy if
it has this collaboration.
I'm searching for that.
And I try to
contribute by showing
that nature operates like that.
The universe is like that.
Even the universe,
as we saw before,
is an Akashic field where
all things are connected,
all things are conserved.
And therefore, I feel that this
is based on what I experience,
what I've always experienced.
And I want to cultivate
this experience.
It is what makes me whole
and makes me living.
>> Would you say that
on a regular basis,
you consciously connect to
the Akashic field every day?
>> Not consciously,
subconsciously, deeply,
spiritually, yes.
I have a little place
here in my house,
but it could have been
anywhere else, which
is a little shrine or a
little place of meditation,
has a Buddha in it for a
feeling of timelessness
and which is a beautiful
view opening to a valley that
has been not only permanently
inhabited but also permanently
worked.
The land has been permanently
worked for 5,000 years
from the Etruscan times,
which was before the Romans.
And this valley has something
very human about it.
It shows the interaction of
people, of humanity with nature,
not as something that
we impose on nature.
And new settlements very often
are industrial settlements
or just massive
living settlements,
which are something that you
put over, place on nature,
doesn't really belong to it.
Here I have a sense that
we belong to nature,
that this valley
has been existing.
And it is part of humanity
to be part of this valley.
So I feel that my experience is
one which gives me the strength
to move forward, gives me the
strength also to have whatever
insight I possess.
And people claim
that I could show
them the way to some insights.
And that is something not that I
manufacture, not that I create,
not that I do consciously.
This connection that I have to
the field is a subconscious,
is a spontaneous connection.
I don't think we can
have it any other way.
I think we must be in a
different altered state
of consciousness in
order to really connect
to the field, the
ordinary state--
And we can measure this
by the EEG patterns,
the electroencephalographic
patterns,
in ordinary states of
delta, for example.
We see the world around us.
And we go down deeper down
to alpha and beta and theta.
And then I think
we can also have
experiences that go beyond
the everyday sites around us.
We are in a deeper dimension.
I connect through music.
I connect through ideas,
through great literature,
through enjoying
nature, and also
through enjoying creating
theories that makes sense to me.
And I try to communicate.
And I hope it makes
sense to others.
That is the experience
that I have.
And that is the
experience that I
pursue with all
the time and energy
to have at my disposition.
>> So when you connect, if
I'm following you correctly,
it feels like this
tremendous sense of oneness?
>> There are many
ways to it, many ways.
Carl Jung already
has pointed out
that our everyday
consciousness is just
a thin layer over a
deeper consciousness,
our psyche is much more than
the surface consciousness
of looking at things and events
and interacting with them.
We have a deeper sense.
So we are actually connected
by nature, by the universe.
We are connected being.
But we eliminate it.
Consciousness is
not only an avenue
to a deeper connection, a
deeper dimension of the world.
It's also a filter.
Everyday consciousness
is a filter.
It filters out what we could be
feeling, what we could perceive
by reducing it only to
the everyday happenings
to the items that are
immediately close to us.
Einstein, Schrödinger, Jung,
all the great scientists
have come across this notion.
Consciousness is not only
a new avenue, an opening,
it's also a restriction.
But it's up to us
whether we stay
within that kind of restricted
everyday consciousness
or whether we go deeper.
We can all go deeper.
We can all enter
into altered states.
Prayer does that.
Meditation does that.
Art does that.
Nature does that.
And so our culture
and the highest levels
of cultural expression are
these expressions of oneness,
of belonging.
And when young people today they
talk about unconditional love,
they talk about this experience.
You can't just talk
about unconditional love.
You don't know what it means.
You must feel it.
You must experience it.
And people who do that, who
really talk about it, who really
are a sense of this
love, projected,
created toward
receiving this love also
from everything, that is then
they are in another dimension.
They're entering into the true
dimension, which you and I,
we can talk about the
Akashic dimension.
It's also the quantum dimension.
It's the new science,
new spirituality.
The two things are
no longer separate.
The new science bears
out many of the insights
of great spirituality of
the thousands of years.
I'm exploring this.
This is one of my tasks,
one of my mission,
a sense of exploring the great
truths that have been expressed
coming to the fore
thousands of years
ago, how they are transmitted
today in science because they
are there in science,
whether it comes
to healthy living, good eating,
good rapport with each other,
with nature.
It has all been known.
And now the new biology, the
quantum biology, the quantum
psychology, the consciousness
research, the new physics
telling us that this indeed is
not just imagination, that's
the way things are.
>> Many people assume that they
have an inability to be able
to reach those altered states
of course without using drugs.
And they don't feel they
have a sense of creativity.
Is there something that
you can offer to inspire
people who feel that way?
>> Well, that is a mistake.
That is a dangerous fallacy
of the modern mindset.
These people consciously
or subconsciously
operate on the Newtonian
paradigm, which says,
the only reality is bits
of matter called atoms
moving around in passive
space and in different time.
And we are just that.
And going anything beyond
it is just imagination.
So this is the normal
paradigm, which
is no longer valid in science.
But it's still
powerful in society.
People who feel
like you are saying,
they can't go
beyond the surface,
they operate on the
basis of this paradigm.
Very often what we believe
influences what we actually see.
Very often we don't even see or
perceive what we don't believe.
And when these
people don't believe
that they can go beyond it,
they don't go beyond it.
They can't.
We have to open up.
The first thing is to open up.
The great blessing in
disguise, if I might say,
the current pandemic is
that it opens up people.
It's more than the
world as usual.
There is more to this world.
There are more
possibilities also,
more dangers but
more opportunities.
And so this old
mindset, the restricted,
just me, just this world, just
this bits of metal around me,
just this one life, all this
paradigm is breaking down.
That is the blessing
in disguise.
>> You're saying that
quantum consciousness,
the Akashic field, the
universe, it's all the same.
So to that, could you
give us a definition
of quantum consciousness?
>> Entering into the one
consciousness of the universe.
We talked about spirit.
You could talk about
God, the Dao, the Buddha,
all this kind of
the great spirit
as in the animistic religions.
There's always a
sense that there
is more to this world than
just the everyday reality.
And perceiving that
feeling into it
is to enter into a
different domain.
It calls for a different
sense of consciousness.
Quantum consciousness
is to enter into it.
No wonder that the great
religions and spiritual systems
always had rituals and rites.
These are all avenues
in which you can promote
the opening of consciousness.
Drugs is also another one.
Some of them are dangerous.
And of course, some of
these religious scriptures
become just dry
dogmas if you're not
taking the spirit
of the religion
but only the word of it.
The best way is to proceed on
your own experience, to open up.
Children are open.
Children live in a
miraculous world.
But this is a miraculous world.
And we got to learn in
it, just like artists
do continue to live.
I think a great artist
remains a child in that sense.
We don't lose that
sense of wonder.
Again, just to
quote Einstein again
who said so many
wonderful things, he said,
"There are two ways to
live your life, either
as if everything is a
miracle or as if nothing is."
Well, these people
who are working
on the old paradigm and the
Newtonian restrictive paradigm,
they think nothing is a miracle.
Everything is just bits
of matter moving around,
pushed around by energy.
If you look at new
science and link it again
with the old ancient
spirituality insights,
you live in a different
universe because then it
opens up for you.
And you know that you
are part of something
which you can call divine.
Certainly, it's more than
the everyday material world.
It is there.
And we can become part of it.
Our consciousness can join it.
That is to me having a
real quantum consciousness.
>> So everything that you've
been talking about for the most
part, would you say is that
all a part of the conscious
revolution?
>> There is a revolution
of consciousness.
In fact, something
like 15 years ago,
I wrote a book called
"The Consciousness
Revolution" with Stanislav
Grof and Peter Russell.
So I've been thinking about
this idea of a revolution
of consciousness, yes.
And now people start
talking about it.
Before, I was perhaps a
bit ahead of the times
because people didn't
understand what
I mean by a revolution
of consciousness.
Now becoming more
aware of the fact
that there is more to
the world than our body,
than the cells of our
body, or if you like,
the cells of our
body themselves are
a conscious, remarkable,
coherent, oneness, oriented
entity.
Everything is around us.
It's a miraculous universe.
So living in this
universe is to live
with a different consciousness.
And if you begin
to realize this,
then it's a revolution on
the level of consciousness.
But it's also a return, a
return back to ancient wisdom.
I wrote a book, my most
recent, published book,
which was published a
couple of months ago.
It's called "Reconnecting
to the Source."
And I mean reconnecting
with consciousness,
with our whole sense to
something which is deeper
than the everyday
world, the source
out of which came the world
because now we recognize.
And very few people,
other than some really
hard-nosed believers,
old believers,
would contest that
the world is evolving,
that evolution is a
fact, that we were not
born like this
ever myriads years
ago, that we evolved
from common origins.
And if we do so, then
out of which we evolved
must have had the seeds
of what we became.
It was all there.
The spirit that makes
the universe what it is
has been there at
the Big Bang, which
was the beginning
of this universe,
18.3 billion years ago.
So I think it's all having to
do with recognizing who we are,
evolving beings
in space and time,
interacting, interdependent,
and jointly creative
with all of the things.
We forget this,
and then we create
an artificial synthetic world,
which is prone to break down,
which is breaking
down all around us.
I don't pretend to
tell you to know what
caused this virus outbreak.
But certainly, one
of the elements
is that we are living more
and more in an unnatural way,
more and more removed from
what makes nature flourishing.
We have separated
ourselves off using
synthetic artificial means
for everything, including
our health.
What we eat is more synthetic
than natural and more.
What we wear is the same thing.
And all we talk to
each other very often
is just slightly the same way
removed from the deeper reality.
We are now being shocked
back into our senses.
And that is something that
we can be grateful for.
>> Would you please
expand a little bit more
on the scientific materialism
and whether or not you sincerely
believe it's shifting
and to what degree?
>> Well, science is shifting.
Science is no longer
what we thought it was.
One of the greatest
contemporary scientists,
he died a few decades
ago, Max Planck.
He was the father of
the atomic theory.
He said in one of
his last talks--
it was in Florence,
Italy, as it happens.
He gave a talk.
And he said, "One
thing I can tell you
after 40 years of researching
the deepest reality that we can
find, which is the reality of
atoms, I can tell you this much,
there is no such thing as
matter in the universe."
I think the other great
physicists today would certainly
agree with that.
But that's a shock
for other people.
What do you mean
there's no matter?
What is there then?
What we find and Max
Planck said and I
agree with that, what we
find are clusters and sets
of vibration coherent
with each other,
interacting, building
higher levels of vibration.
Our body is a vibrating system.
And the proton and the neutron
in the nucleus of the electron
are vibrating entities.
And they build higher
and higher level systems.
The whole universe is a
vibrating whole system.
Very, very different idea
from little hard pieces
of matter that Democritus,
the great Greek philosopher,
thought these are
indestructible.
We know that they are
not indestructible.
The deeper we
penetrate, the more
we find there is nothing hard,
nothing permanent about it.
It's all vibration.
It's all coincided,
coherent waves building
higher and higher-level waves.
It's a C. It's a quantum
C, information C,
not a bit of space and time
in which matter moves around.
>> Ervin, if we could talk
a little bit more about what
critical point you believe
we are in our evolution.
>> We are in a bifurcation.
So that's a technical term.
It comes from the
physical sciences,
from cybernetics, also
from physical chemistry.
But it just means that there
is a sudden change, a forking
in the past of our development.
We all evolve.
Temporarily, we
could be staying put.
We can seldom move back if ever.
We can move to something
else, or we can disappear.
That's also possible.
We can become extinct.
95 or more percent of this
great species since the Cambrian
revolution have become extinct.
Why not humanity?
But we have consciousness.
We can recognize who we
are and what we are doing.
And therefore, we can
consciously change our ways.
But we are at a point
where our evolution needs
to be taken into our hand
because we have gone off
in a wrong way, not just
in the past few years
but in the past 150,
200 years perhaps.
We have put our trust into
a material-based technology.
We can create the
world around us.
We can make what we
want, what we need.
And never mind the
world, never mind
the effect, the consequences.
Don't think of yourself
as being in the world.
Think of yourself as being
above the world, master world.
That has been the ruling
principle in the modern world,
especially, first of all,
in the Western world.
But then in the 20th century,
through the two world wars,
this kind of thinking spread
also to the East and as much
as it could spread also to
the less developed countries
in the south.
This sense of making the world
according to our own wishes
created a world in
which we have using
our powers to promote part
of that system and not
the other parts.
The part is what
our interests are.
Our power, our wealth is
what we want to promote.
Never mind the rest.
And by doing this, there's
a technical term as well
like bifurcation.
It's being suboptimizing.
When you optimize
a system, you make
it work as well as possible,
the best possible way.
When you suboptimize, it means
that you are only optimizing
a part of the system.
And that part can flourish
but for a time only.
Sooner or later, it
becomes kind of a cancer
because that system
begins to take
the resources to use the
energy that would also
be needed for others.
It becomes kind of a
blister, and then later
on a dangerous cancer.
We have to return to the view
that this system in which we
live is a deeply, strongly
interconnected system that you
cannot take apart and cannot use
only one part to the exclusion
of the others.
It's not a simple bicycle.
It's a complex
computer, if you like,
if you want to use
those metaphors for it.
So here we are in
a point in history
where we recognize that
the pursuit of material
gains with the
material instruments
that we had can
provide well-being
for a short period
for a small minority.
But it's dangerous in the longer
term for the great majority.
That's the point we are at.
The sooner we realize
this, the sooner
we start adapting
our ways of living.
We can do so.
We are now being forced to
adapt because it turns out
that the whole system
is being shaken up.
So let's use this not just
as a temporary interlude
and just recover everything
that has been before.
That would be very tragic.
That would be dangerous.
Let's use it to learn.
Learn from what is happening.
Learn that we can be a
highly fragile system that
can easily go extinct even.
Let's learn and do
something better.
Something better is something
what everything in the universe
is doing around us,
building coherent systems.
That's a very, very
important term, "coherence."
It means that all
parts of a system
are interacting with
all other parts.
And together, they
maintain the system.
Let's look at the whole system.
What is the whole system for us?
Obviously, the whole
system is a universe.
But what really concerns us
is what we call the biosphere.
The sphere of life on Earth.
That's the system.
If we can make that flourish,
if we can make it sustainable,
then we can live in it.
And we can flourish ourselves.
If we try to flourish at
the expense of that system,
then sooner or later,
it will break down.
And it makes us break down.
So here we are at a
historic turning point,
a historic turning
point where we recognize
some age-old insights.
But we recognize that this is a
precondition of our existence.
>> So, Ervin, I'd love for you
to say anything else knowing
that the film is about our
intuitive selves and the idea is
for people to understand the
importance of connecting to that
intuitive self, to
connecting to the Akashic,
to connecting to our collective,
instead of listening to these
forces that are not helpful.
Could you in your own
words speak to that?
>> There are many words being
used today which are very
significant.
And they are not only used
by hippies and by people
who are on the margins.
They are becoming
common in business
also, certainly in
the scientific world.
And sooner or later, hopefully
it also moves into politics.
These terms are
oneness, wholeness,
distributed wellness,
altogether health
in all senses of the term,
physical health, organic health,
biological health, but
also psychological health,
being sane.
If we recognize each other as
being part of the same whole,
then we can look at
each other with love
because we know that the
other person is really us
and we are that other person.
We are waking up.
And that awakening is a
long-overdue phenomenon.
We reached a critical
point where if not a virus,
it could have been a dryness
catastrophe, a sea rise
catastrophe, could
have been any one
of a number of ecological
and migrant catastrophes
happening to us if we
continue like that.
We are now waking
up because we have
been pushed to the point
of having to change.
So the great danger to my mind--
this is the message
that I want to leave.
The grave danger is to do
what is known as a reset.
Don't reset it.
Don't go back to what there was.
The opportunity is
there to go forward,
so we have to create
the world, not just
try to redo where we have been.
Hopefully we can do
something better.
We can do it.
Will we do it?
That's a big question.
But the more we
raise this question,
raise awareness,
raise our creativity,
the better our chances are.
Young people have the
energy, have the spirit,
have the motivation if they
are allowed to live it,
to make it work, instead of
being forced into a mold.
Let it be freer.
Education is a dangerous
process because it
can be education
out of something,
as well as education into.
Let's not educate ourselves
out of our native creativity
or native wholeness.
Let's remember what we
always knew as a child.
We are living in
a wondrous world.
We're living it and
sharing it together.
Every day is a miracle.
Every day is something we
can create ourselves together
with all people around us.
That is a real possibility.
That is our chance.
That is our opportunity.
And that is why I'm
always happy and feel
honored and responsible
for talking about it,
like I do today.
>> Thank you.
I think that's a wrap.
Was there something
else you wanted to say?
>> I said who we are,
what the world is,
and what our future is,
so what else can I say?